Switching to Linux in 2020. 

So, the new decade's arrived and Windows 7's end of life approaches on
January 14. As a holdout poweruser, you now have to make a tough decision.
Continue using an unsupported operating system and hope nothing goes wrong or
begrudgingly make the switch to Windows 10, with neither choice being
particularly great. Thankfully, you have a third option: switch to Linux. 
That way, you'll still get up-to-date software while not having to deal with
Microsoft's current bullshit. 

So if you've heard about Linux in the past and want to make the jump soon, I'll
be guiding you through all of the necessary steps to get your system running
and ready for gaming. 

Before I get into that, I need to make a disclaimer. Linux is not Windows. It's
a completely different operating system with its own design philosophies and
nuances. So forget what you already know about Windows and come into Linux with
an open mind, ready to relearn some of the basics. Now, you don't need to
become a system administrator, but a brief understanding of how your computer
works will make your life a lot easier, especially when troubleshooting.
Strictly speaking, this isn't necessary and you can stick entirely to graphical
menus, you to learn the essentials so you can play more games and further
customize your desktop experience.     

Part 0: Reasons Why

So, why would you use Linux over Windows? Well, if you want up-to-date security
updates, your only other choice is Windows 10. And if you're like me and
despise that trashfire of an operating system, then Linux is your only
alternative. 

Secondly, it's free. You can legally download Linux at no cost and use it how
you see fit, without dealing with Microsoft's licensing and arcane terms of
service. 

Finally, Linux generally has no bloatware. You install it without receiving
constant advertisements for candry crush saga or dealing with cortana's
nagging. While you can disable those, it's extremely annoying to get rid of all
of the crap and telemetry pre-installed. Even then, Microsoft can them back in
a future update, so get ready to deal with lots of uphill battles. Linux
respects you by default and doesn't make you use a group policy editor or batch
scripts to have some peace of mind. 

The major downside to this is that Windows is much more widely supported, so
you'll encounter some software bugs that aren't present on Microsoft's platform
or have applications that flatout refuse to run on Linux. I generally haven't
notice many, but they do exist. 

Part 1: Selecting Your Distro

For those of you that already know what flavor of Linux you want to run, feel
free to skip this section. Otherwise, I highly recommend listening.

Unlike Windows, there are multiple variations of Linux available, known
collectively as distributions. While these "distros" function similarly under
the hood, they can vary drastically in their included software, update cycles,
desktop experiences, and so on. With such a large selection to pick from, I'm
going to be curating my list to only include a handful of distros that I find
to be user friendly. So I won't be discussing more advanced options like Arch,
Void, or Gentoo. 

The first recommendation I have is Pop!_OS. It's based on Ubuntu, but includes
some great quality of life tweaks provided by its developer, System 76. The
default desktop environment is called GNOME 3, which offers up a rather unique
experience.  If you're not a fan, then you can install extensions to change
functionality, such as adding in a more traditional start menu or a window bar.
I will be listing some of these in their respective section as well as describe
how to install them. 

The second recommendation is Solus. Unlike Pop!_OS, it's a completely
independent distribution that seeks to offer a curated desktop experience. Its
flagship desktop enviroment is budgie, which offers a more traditional user
interface than GNOME. This is my distro of choice, and my daily driver. It is
leaner on software support than Ubuntu, but I find it to have the essentials,
which tend to be more up to date. 

Finally, I'll be covering Linux Mint. Out of all the distros mentioned on this
list, it offers up an experience most similar to Windows 7. So if you don't
want to have to deal with GNOME or want a more robust software repository, then
Mint is a great choice. 

Of course, there are many other fantastic flavors of Linux out there, such as
Manjaro or Kubuntu, but I'll focus on those three for now, to keep this video
rather short and accessible. 

Part 2: Setup.

To get started, all you need is a spare flash drive and an internet connection.
For advanced users, you can go ahead and configure options in your
motherboard's BIOS right now. I'd recommend disabling secure
boot, so you don't run into any problems later on.  

For me, I had press the delete key to enter my BIOS menu when booting my
computer. A single press should be sufficient when you see your manufacturer
splash screen logo, but it doesn't hurt to mash it. Once there, enter your
settings menu, go to the security tab, and make sure that the trusted computing
or secure boot option is disabled. This will vary from motherboard to
motherboard, so you might have to look around for a bit. You can also change
device boot priority while in your BIOS, so a flash drive can have precedence a
hard drive, though this is not necessary. Save your changes and then reboot
your computer.  

While in Windows, navigate to the website of your linux distro of choice. Pop
OS is located on system76.com/pop, Linux Mint is on linuxmint.com, and Solus is
on getsol.us. Links will be provided in the video description. From here,
navigate to the download page and choose the appropiate download. System 76
provides different files based on your graphics card manufacturer, so be sure
to choose the one that matches your current installed GPU. 

For advanced users, you can go ahead and download the additional SHA256SUM
file, which allows you to check the integrity of the operating system you just
downloaded. This is not necessary by any means, but it guarantees that you got
the right file and that nothing was damaged during the download. To validate
the output of the iso file, use Windows' CertUtil in the command prompt to
generate the checksum.  Type in certUtil -hashfile yourFilesFullPatch SHA256 to
generate the appropriate output.  If it matches the one on your distro
provider's website, then you're good to go. 

From that here on, you'll need a program to burn the Linux iso file to a flash
drive. Some notable programs include rufus or balenaEtcher. I'll be using the
latter due to its simplicity. Keep in mind that this process will wipe the
drive, so save all data that you don't want to lose. Once you're ready, select
your iso file, then your thumb drive, and proceed to flashing.  

Once you've finished with that, restart your computer. When you see the splash
screen, hit the F11 key to enter the boot menu.  From here on, you can select
your linux flash drive to boot on instead of your Windows installation. If you
haven't adjusted boost priority in the BIOS, then you will boot into Windows by
default, so do not forget to do this step. 

Now, my motherboard manufacturer is MSI. Different companies can assign
different hotkeys to the boot and BIOS menu, so be sure to consult your manual
if they're not listed on the splash screen.

After a short wait, you're taken into a live desktop environment. From here,
you can play around with the UI and get used to it before making any
committments. If you like what you've seen, then click the install icon and
walk through the installer. You're generally given the option to select if you
want to create a new Linux partition to coexist with your Windows 7 install, or
dedicate the entire drive to Linux. Generally, it's a bit easier to do the
latter option, but you lose all data on the drive.

I'll be doing the second option, so if you'd like to follow along, be sure to
back up all of your important files to another drive or to the cloud. 

Once you've finished installing, you now have a brand new Linux machine. Feel
free to play around with it and tweak your settings to your heart's content. 

Part 3: Gaming

Part 4: Advanced Linux 

Part 5: Conclusion 
